Add reactive mode blog post (#427)
apache/flink-web: _posts/2021-04-05-reactive-mode.md

---
layout: post
title:  "Scaling Flink automatically with Reactive Mode"
date: 2021-04-5T00:00:00.000Z
authors:
- rob:
  name: "Robert Metzger"
  twitter: "rmetzger_"
excerpt: Apache Flink 1.13 introduced Reactive Mode, a big step forward in Flink's ability to dynamically adjust to changing workloads, reducing resource utilization and overall costs. The blog post is demonstrating Reactive Mode on Kubernetes, including some lessons learned.

---

{% toc %}

> ## Introduction

Reviewer: Meta comment: What helps when reviewing blog posts via Github is to put every sentence in a separate line. That way one can easily make suggestions and it is much more review friendly.

Streaming jobs which run for several days or longer usually experience changes in their workload during their lifetime. These changes can originate from seasonal spikes, such as day vs. night, weekdays vs. weekend or holidays vs. non-holidays, sudden events or simply growing popularity of your product. Some of these changes are more predictable than others but what all have in common is that they change the resource demand of your job if you want to keep the same service quality for your customers.

> When comparing a scenario where the number of workers is static, while the workload is changing over time against the same workload, but with the number of workers adjusting to the workload. The area between the worker allocation and the load is the loss, which is generally much higher with a static allocation. 

Reviewer: The first sentence seem to be missing something. What happens if we compare static vs. dynamic number of workers?

<div class="row front-graphic">

>   <img src="{{ site.baseurl }}/img/blog/2021-04-reactive-mode/intro.png" width="640px" alt="Reactive Mode Intro"/>

Reviewer: Font is not sharp on my machine.

Reviewer: In the graphs it looks that the workers are always ahead of the load. Usually I would expect that you have some over and under provisioning when changing the workloads.

</div>

> Since Flink 1.2 introduced [rescalable state](https://flink.apache.org/features/2017/07/04/flink-rescalable-state.html), it has been possible to **manually rescale**. You can stop-and-restore a job with a different parallelism. If your job was running with a parallelism of p=100, and your load increased, you can restart it with p=200 to cope with the additional data. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since Flink 1.2 introduced [rescalable state](https://flink.apache.org/features/2017/07/04/flink-rescalable-state.html), it has been possible to **manually rescale** a Flink job. You can stop-and-restore a job with a different parallelism. If your job was running with a parallelism of p=100, and your load increased, you can restart it with p=200 to cope with the additional data. 
```

The problem with this approach is that you have to orchestrate a rescale operation with custom tools, including error handling etc. by yourself.

> [Reactive Mode](https://ci.apache.org/projects/flink/flink-docs-master/docs/deployment/elastic_scaling/) introduces a new option in Flink 1.13: You monitor your Flink cluster and add or remove resources depending on some metrics, Flink will do the rest. Reactive Mode is a JobManager mode where your job is always using all TaskManagers available.

Reviewer: Maybe 

```suggestion
The [Reactive Mode](https://ci.apache.org/projects/flink/flink-docs-master/docs/deployment/elastic_scaling/) introduces a new option in Flink 1.13: You monitor your Flink cluster and add or remove resources depending on some metrics, Flink will do the rest. Reactive Mode is a JobManager mode where your job is always using all TaskManagers available.
```

> [Reactive Mode](https://ci.apache.org/projects/flink/flink-docs-master/docs/deployment/elastic_scaling/) introduces a new option in Flink 1.13: You monitor your Flink cluster and add or remove resources depending on some metrics, Flink will do the rest. Reactive Mode is a JobManager mode where your job is always using all TaskManagers available.

Reviewer: > Reactive Mode is a JobManager mode where your job is always using all TaskManagers available.

Maybe say that the new Reactive Mode will try to use all available resources/slots or so.

> The big benefit of Reactive Mode is that you don't need any specific knowledge to scale Flink anymore. Flink basically behaves like a fleet of servers (webservers, caches, batch processing) that you can grow and shrink as you wish. Since this is such a common pattern, there is a lot of infrastructure available for handling this case. All major cloud providers provide facilities to monitor a metric and automatically scale a set of machines accordingly. This is for example called [Auto Scaling group](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/autoscaling/ec2/userguide/AutoScalingGroup.html) in AWS, or [Managed Instance group](https://cloud.google.com/compute/docs/instance-groups) in Google Cloud.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The big benefit of Reactive Mode is that you don't need any specific knowledge to scale Flink anymore. Flink basically behaves like a fleet of servers (webservers, caches, batch processing) that you can grow and shrink as you wish. Since this is such a common pattern, there is a lot of infrastructure available for handling this case. All major cloud providers provide utilities to monitor a metric and automatically scale a set of machines accordingly. This is for example called [Auto Scaling group](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/autoscaling/ec2/userguide/AutoScalingGroup.html) in AWS, or [Managed Instance group](https://cloud.google.com/compute/docs/instance-groups) in Google Cloud.
```

> Similarly, Kubernetes has [Horizontal Pod Autoscaler](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/run-application/horizontal-pod-autoscale/)s.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Similarly, Kubernetes has [Horizontal Pod Autoscalers](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/run-application/horizontal-pod-autoscale/).
```

> What's interesting as a side note is that unlike most autoscalable "fleets of servers", Flink is a stateful system, often processing valuable data requiring strong correctness guarantees, comparable to a database. But unlike a database, Flink is resilient enough (through checkpointing and state backups) to adjust to changing workloads by just adding or removing resources, with very little requirements (simple blob store for state backups).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
What is interesting as a side note is that unlike most autoscalable "fleets of servers", Flink is a stateful system, often processing valuable data requiring strong correctness guarantees, comparable to a database. But unlike a database, Flink is resilient enough (through checkpointing and state backups) to adjust to changing workloads by just adding or removing resources, with very little requirements (simple blob store for state backups).
```

Reviewer: Not sure whether the claim that databases don't support this actually holds true in the general case.

Author: I weakened the claim a bit...

## Getting Started

> If you want to try out Reactive Mode yourself locally, just follow these steps on a Flink 1.13.0 distribution:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want to try out Reactive Mode yourself locally, just follow these steps using a Flink 1.13.0 distribution:
```

```bash

> # these instructions assume you are in the root directory of a Flink distribution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# These instructions assume you are in the root directory of a Flink distribution.
```

> # Put Job into lib/ directory

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Put Job into usrlib/ directory
```

> cp ./examples/streaming/TopSpeedWindowing.jar lib/

Reviewer: ```suggestion
cp ./examples/streaming/TopSpeedWindowing.jar usrlib/
```

Author: The usrlib/ directory doesn't exist on a standalone distribution of Flink, only in the docker image.

Reviewer: You should still be able to create and use it.

# Submit Job in Reactive Mode
./bin/standalone-job.sh start -Dscheduler-mode=reactive -Dexecution.checkpointing.interval="10s" -j org.apache.flink.streaming.examples.windowing.TopSpeedWindowing
# Start first TaskManager
./bin/taskmanager.sh start
```

You have now started a Flink job in Reactive Mode. The [web interface](http://localhost:8081) shows that the job is running on one TaskManager. If you want to scale up the job, simply add another TaskManager to the cluster:

```bash
# Start additional TaskManager
./bin/taskmanager.sh start
```

To scale down, remove a TaskManager instance.

```bash
# Remove a TaskManager
./bin/taskmanager.sh stop
```

Reactive Mode also works when deploying [Flink on Docker](https://ci.apache.org/projects/flink/flink-docs-master/docs/deployment/resource-providers/standalone/docker/) or using the [standalone Kubernetes deployment](https://ci.apache.org/projects/flink/flink-docs-master/docs/deployment/resource-providers/standalone/kubernetes/) (both only as application clusters).

## Demo on Kubernetes

> In this section, we want to demonstrate Reactive Mode in a real-world scenario. You can use this demonstration as a starting point for your own scalable deployment of Flink on Kubernetes, or as a template for building your own deployment on another infrastructure.

Reviewer: Not sure about "Reactive Mode" vs. the reactive mode.

### The Setup

> The central idea of this demo is to use a Kubernetes [Horizontal Pod Autoscaler](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/run-application/horizontal-pod-autoscale/), which monitors the CPU load of all TaskManager pods and adjusts their replication factor accordingly. On high CPU load, the autoscaler should add more TaskManagers, distributing the load across more machines, on low load, it should stop TaskManagers to save resources.

Reviewer: Not sure about the first comma.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The central idea of this demo is to use a Kubernetes [Horizontal Pod Autoscaler](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/run-application/horizontal-pod-autoscale/), which monitors the CPU load of all TaskManager pods and adjusts their replication factor accordingly. On high CPU load, the autoscaler should add more TaskManagers, distributing the load across more machines. On low load, it should stop TaskManagers to save resources.
```

The whole setup is presented here:

<div class="row front-graphic">

>   <img src="{{ site.baseurl }}/img/blog/2021-04-reactive-mode/arch.png" width="640px" alt="Reactive Mode Demo Architecture"/>

Reviewer: Maybe somebody can help us beautify this graphic a bit.

**Additional Components**:

- We have a **Zookeeper** and **Kafka** deployment (each with one pod) to provide a Kafka topic that serves as the input for the Flink job.
- **Data Generator** pod which produces messages to the Kafka topic. The data generator is generating simple string messages at a adjustable rate. In this experiment, the rate is following a sine wave.
- For monitoring, we are deploying **Prometheus** and **Grafana**.

The entire setup is [available on GitHub](https://github.com/rmetzger/flink-reactive-mode-k8s-demo) if you want to try this out yourself.

### Results

We've deployed above components on a hosted Kubernetes cluster, running it for several days. The results are best examined based on a simple Grafana dashboard:

<div class="row front-graphic">
  <img src="{{ site.baseurl }}/img/blog/2021-04-reactive-mode/result.png" alt="Reactive Mode Demo Result"/>

>   <p class="align-center">Reactive Mode Experiment Results</p>

Reviewer: Can we increase the font of the different graphs a bit? It is quite hard to read.

- The bottom left chart is showing the **CPU load** per TaskManager. We've added this metric to the dashboard, since this is the metric used by Kubernetes to decide on the replica count of the TaskManager deployment. We can see that as soon as a certain CPU load is reached, additional TaskManagers are started.

- The bottom right chart is showing the **TaskManager count** over time. We see when throughput (and CPU load) is peaking, that we usually run on 5 TaskManagers (with some peaks up to even 8). On low throughput, we are running the minimal number of just one TaskManager. This chart is showing nicely that Reactive Mode is working as expected in this experiment: The number of TaskManagers is adjusting to the load on the system.

### Lessons Learned

When we initially started with the experiment, we noticed some anomalies in the behavior of Flink, depicted in this chart:

<div class="row front-graphic">
  <img src="{{ site.baseurl }}/img/blog/2021-04-reactive-mode/high-timeout.png" alt="Reactive Mode Demo Lessons Learned"/>

> 	<p class="align-center">Reactive Mode not scaling down properly</p>

Reviewer: Same here. The font is quite small.

</div>

In all the charts, we see sudden spikes or drops: The consumer lag is going to up to 600k messages (that's 8 times more than the usual 75k lag we observe at peak), the throughput seems to peak (and drop). On the "Number of TaskManagers" chart, we see that we are not following the throughput line very nicely. We are wasting resources by allocating too many TaskManagers for the given at rate.

We see that these issues are only occurring when the load is decreasing, and Reactive Mode is supposed to scale down. So what is happening here?

> The Flink JobManager is sending periodic heartbeats to the TaskManagers, to check if they are still alive. These heartbeats have a default timeout of 50 seconds. This value might seem high, but in high load scenarios, there might me network congestions, garbage collection pauses or other disruptions that cause slow heartbeats. We don't want to consider a TaskManager dead just because of a temporary disruption.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Flink JobManager is sending periodic heartbeats to the TaskManagers, to check if they are still alive. These heartbeats have a default timeout of 50 seconds. This value might seem high, but in high load scenarios, there might be network congestions, garbage collection pauses or other disruptions that cause slow heartbeats. We don't want to consider a TaskManager dead just because of a temporary disruption.
```

> However, this default value is causing problems in this experiment: When the Kubernetes autoscaler notices that the CPU load has gone down, it will reduce the replica count of the TaskManager deployment, stopping at least one TaskManager instance. Flink will almost immediately stop processing messages, because the connection loss in the data transport layer of Flink. However, the JobManager will wait for 50 seconds (the default heartbeat timeout) before the TaskManager is considered dead.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, this default value is causing problems in this experiment: When the Kubernetes autoscaler notices that the CPU load has gone down, it will reduce the replica count of the TaskManager deployment, stopping at least one TaskManager instance. Flink will almost immediately stop processing messages, because of the connection loss in the data transport layer of Flink. However, the JobManager will wait for 50 seconds (the default heartbeat timeout) before the TaskManager is considered dead.
```

During this waiting period, the throughput is at zero and messages are queuing in Kafka (causing spikes in the consumer lag). Once Flink is running again, Flink will try to catch up on the queued messages, causing a spike in CPU load. The autoscaler notices this load spike and allocates more TaskManagers.

We are only seeing this effect on scale down, because scale down is much more disruptive than scaling up. Scale up, which means adding TaskManagers, is disrupting the processing only for the duration of a job restart (which is fast since our application state are just a few bytes for the Kafka offsets), while scaling down is disrupting the processing for roughly 50 seconds.

> To mitigate this issue, we've reduced the heartbeat timeout in our experiment to 8 seconds. Additionally, we are looking into improving the behavior of the JobManager to handle TaskManager losses better.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To mitigate this issue, we have reduced the heartbeat timeout in our experiment to 8 seconds. Additionally, we are looking into improving the behavior of the JobManager to detect TaskManager losses better and faster.
```

---
layout: post
title:  "Scaling Flink automatically with Reactive Mode"
date: 2021-04-5T00:00:00.000Z
authors:
- rob:
  name: "Robert Metzger"
  twitter: "rmetzger_"

> excerpt: Apache Flink 1.13 introduced Reactive Mode, a big step forward in Flink's ability to dynamically adjust to changing workloads, reducing resource utilization and overall costs. The blog post is demonstrating Reactive Mode on Kubernetes, including some lessons learned.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
excerpt: Apache Flink 1.13 introduced Reactive Mode, a big step forward in Flink's ability to dynamically adjust to changing workloads, reducing resource utilization and overall costs. This blog post showcases how to use this new feature on Kubernetes, including some lessons learned.
```

---

{% toc %}

## Introduction

> Streaming jobs which run for several days or longer usually experience changes in their workload during their lifetime. These changes can originate from seasonal spikes, such as day vs. night, weekdays vs. weekend or holidays vs. non-holidays, sudden events or simply growing popularity of your product. Some of these changes are more predictable than others but what all have in common is that they change the resource demand of your job if you want to keep the same service quality for your customers.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Streaming jobs which run for several days or longer usually experience variations in workload during their lifetime. These variations can originate from seasonal spikes, such as day vs. night, weekdays vs. weekend or holidays vs. non-holidays, sudden events or simply the growing popularity of your product. Although some of these variations are more predictable than others, in all cases there is a change in job resource demand that needs to be addressed if you want to ensure the same quality of service for your customers.
```

> A simple way of quantifying the mismatch between the required resources and the available resources is by measuring the space between the actual load and the number of available workers. In the figure below, in case of static resource allocation (on the left), we see that there's a lot of space between the actual load and the available workers, hence we are wasting resources. For elastic resource allocation, there is only little space between the red and black line.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A simple way of quantifying the mismatch between the required resources and the available resources is to measure the space between the actual load and the number of available workers. As pictured below, in the case of static resource allocation, you can see that there's a big gap between the actual load and the available workers — hence, we are wasting resources. For elastic resource allocation, the gap between the red and black line is consistently small.
```

<div class="row front-graphic">
  <img src="{{ site.baseurl }}/img/blog/2021-04-reactive-mode/intro.svg" width="640px" alt="Reactive Mode Intro"/>
</div>

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<div style="line-height:60%;">
    <br>
</div>
```

> Since Flink 1.2 introduced [rescalable state](https://flink.apache.org/features/2017/07/04/flink-rescalable-state.html), it has been possible to **manually rescale** a Flink job. You can stop-and-restore a job with a different parallelism. If your job was running with a parallelism of p=100, and your load increased, you can restart it with p=200 to cope with the additional data. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Manually rescaling** a Flink job has been possible since Flink 1.2 introduced [rescalable state](https://flink.apache.org/features/2017/07/04/flink-rescalable-state.html), which allows you to stop-and-restore a job with a different parallelism. For example, if your job is running with a parallelism of p=100 and your load increases, you can restart it with p=200 to cope with the additional data. 
```

> The problem with this approach is that you have to orchestrate a rescale operation with custom tools, including error handling etc. by yourself.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The problem with this approach is that you have to orchestrate a rescale operation with custom tools by yourself, including error handling and similar tasks.
```

> [Reactive Mode](https://ci.apache.org/projects/flink/flink-docs-master/docs/deployment/elastic_scaling/) introduces a new option in Flink 1.13: You monitor your Flink cluster and add or remove resources depending on some metrics, Flink will do the rest. Reactive Mode is a mode where JobManager will try to use all TaskManager resources available.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### The new Reactive Mode

Flink 1.13 introduces a new option called [Reactive Mode](https://ci.apache.org/projects/flink/flink-docs-master/docs/deployment/elastic_scaling/), in which you monitor your Flink cluster and add (or remove) resources depending on some metrics — Flink will take care of the rest. In this mode, the JobManager will try to use all TaskManager resources available.
```

Reviewer 2: IMO this could use a sub-section for a break in the text.

> The big benefit of Reactive Mode is that you don't need any specific knowledge to scale Flink anymore. Flink basically behaves like a fleet of servers (webservers, caches, batch processing) that you can grow and shrink as you wish. Since this is such a common pattern, there is a lot of infrastructure available for handling this case. All major cloud providers provide utilities to monitor a metric and automatically scale a set of machines accordingly. This is for example called [Auto Scaling group](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/autoscaling/ec2/userguide/AutoScalingGroup.html) in AWS, or [Managed Instance group](https://cloud.google.com/compute/docs/instance-groups) in Google Cloud.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The big benefit of Reactive Mode is that you don't need any specific knowledge to scale Flink anymore. Flink basically behaves like a fleet of servers (e.g. webservers, caches, batch processing) that you can expand or shrink as you wish. Since this is such a common pattern, there is a lot of infrastructure available for handling such cases: all major cloud providers offer utilities to monitor specific metrics and automatically scale a set of machines accordingly. For example, this would be provided through [Auto Scaling groups](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/autoscaling/ec2/userguide/AutoScalingGroup.html) in AWS, and [Managed Instance groups](https://cloud.google.com/compute/docs/instance-groups) in Google Cloud.
```

> Similarly, Kubernetes has [Horizontal Pod Autoscalers](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/run-application/horizontal-pod-autoscale/).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Similarly, Kubernetes provides [Horizontal Pod Autoscalers](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/run-application/horizontal-pod-autoscale/).
```

> What is interesting as a side note is that unlike most autoscalable "fleets of servers", Flink is a stateful system, often processing valuable data requiring strong correctness guarantees, comparable to a database. But unlike many traditional databases, Flink is resilient enough (through checkpointing and state backups) to adjust to changing workloads by just adding or removing resources, with very little requirements (simple blob store for state backups).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
What is interesting, as a side note, is that unlike most auto scalable "fleets of servers", Flink is a stateful system, often processing valuable data requiring strong correctness guarantees (comparable to a database). But, unlike many traditional databases, Flink is resilient enough (through checkpointing and state backups) to adjust to changing workloads by just adding or removing resources, with very little requirements (i.e. simple blob store for state backups).
```

## Getting Started

> If you want to try out Reactive Mode yourself locally, just follow these steps using a Flink 1.13.0 distribution:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you want to try out Reactive Mode yourself locally, follow these steps using a Flink 1.13.0 distribution:
```

```bash
# These instructions assume you are in the root directory of a Flink distribution.
# Put Job into lib/ directory
cp ./examples/streaming/TopSpeedWindowing.jar lib/
# Submit Job in Reactive Mode
./bin/standalone-job.sh start -Dscheduler-mode=reactive -Dexecution.checkpointing.interval="10s" -j org.apache.flink.streaming.examples.windowing.TopSpeedWindowing
# Start first TaskManager
./bin/taskmanager.sh start
```

You have now started a Flink job in Reactive Mode. The [web interface](http://localhost:8081) shows that the job is running on one TaskManager. If you want to scale up the job, simply add another TaskManager to the cluster:

```bash
# Start additional TaskManager
./bin/taskmanager.sh start
```

> To scale down, remove a TaskManager instance.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To scale down, remove a TaskManager instance:
```

```bash
# Remove a TaskManager
./bin/taskmanager.sh stop
```

Reactive Mode also works when deploying [Flink on Docker](https://ci.apache.org/projects/flink/flink-docs-master/docs/deployment/resource-providers/standalone/docker/) or using the [standalone Kubernetes deployment](https://ci.apache.org/projects/flink/flink-docs-master/docs/deployment/resource-providers/standalone/kubernetes/) (both only as application clusters).

## Demo on Kubernetes

> In this section, we want to demonstrate Reactive Mode in a real-world scenario. You can use this demonstration as a starting point for your own scalable deployment of Flink on Kubernetes, or as a template for building your own deployment on another infrastructure.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this section, we want to demonstrate the new Reactive Mode in a real-world scenario. You can use this demo as a starting point for your own scalable deployment of Flink on Kubernetes, or as a template for building your own deployment using a different setup.
```

<div class="row front-graphic">
  <img src="{{ site.baseurl }}/img/blog/2021-04-reactive-mode/arch.png" width="640px" alt="Reactive Mode Demo Architecture"/>
</div>

Let's discuss the components:

**Flink**

- The **JobManager** is deployed as a [Kubernetes job](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/controllers/job/). We are submitting a container that is based on the official Flink Docker image, but has the jar file of our job added to it. The Flink job simply reads data from a Kafka topic and does some expensive math operations per event received. We use these math operations to generate high CPU loads, without requiring a large Kafka deployment.
- The **TaskManager(s)** are deployed as a Kubernetes deployment, which is scaled through a [Horizontal Pod Autoscaler](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/run-application/horizontal-pod-autoscale/). In this experiment, the autoscaler is monitoring the CPU load of the pods in the deployment. The number of pods is adjusted between 1 and 15 pods by the autoscaler.

**Additional Components**:

- We have a **Zookeeper** and **Kafka** deployment (each with one pod) to provide a Kafka topic that serves as the input for the Flink job.

> - **Data Generator** pod which produces messages to the Kafka topic. The data generator is generating simple string messages at a adjustable rate. In this experiment, the rate is following a sine wave.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The **Data Generator** pod produces simple string messages at a adjustable rate to the Kafka topic. In this experiment, the rate is following a sine wave.
```

- For monitoring, we are deploying **Prometheus** and **Grafana**.

The entire setup is [available on GitHub](https://github.com/rmetzger/flink-reactive-mode-k8s-demo) if you want to try this out yourself.

### Results

> We've deployed above components on a hosted Kubernetes cluster, running it for several days. The results are best examined based on a simple Grafana dashboard:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We've deployed all the above components on a hosted Kubernetes cluster, running it for several days. The results are best examined based on the following Grafana dashboard:
```

<div class="row front-graphic">
  <img src="{{ site.baseurl }}/img/blog/2021-04-reactive-mode/result.png" alt="Reactive Mode Demo Result"/>
  <p class="align-center">Reactive Mode Experiment Results</p>
</div>

> Let's take a look at the dashboard:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let's take a closer look at the dashboard:
```

> - On the top left, we see the **Kafka consumer lag**, reported by Flink's Kafka consumer (source). This metric reports basically the queue size of unprocessed messages. A high lag means that Flink is not processing messages as fast as they are produced: we need to scale up. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- On the top left, you can see the **Kafka consumer lag**, reported by Flink's Kafka consumer (source), which reports the queue size of unprocessed messages. A high lag means that Flink is not processing messages as fast as they are produced: we need to scale up. 
```

>   In the chart you see that the lag is usually following the throughput of data coming from Kafka. When the throughput is the highest, the reported lag is at \~75k messages. In low throughput times, it is basically at zero.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 The lag is usually following the throughput of data coming from Kafka. When the throughput is the highest, the reported lag is at \~75k messages. In low throughput times, it is basically at zero.
```

> - On the top right, you see the **throughput**, measured in Records per second, as reported by Flink. You see that the throughput is roughly following a sine wave, peaking at 6k messages per second, and going down to almost zero.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- On the top right, you'll see the **throughput**, measured in records per second, as reported by Flink. The throughput is roughly following a sine wave, peaking at 6k messages per second, and going down to almost zero.
```

> - The bottom left chart is showing the **CPU load** per TaskManager. We've added this metric to the dashboard, since this is the metric used by Kubernetes to decide on the replica count of the TaskManager deployment. We can see that as soon as a certain CPU load is reached, additional TaskManagers are started.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The bottom left chart shows the **CPU load** per TaskManager. We've added this metric to the dashboard because this is what Kubernetes will use to decide on the replica count of the TaskManager deployment. You can see that, as soon as a certain CPU load is reached, additional TaskManagers are started.
```

> - The bottom right chart is showing the **TaskManager count** over time. We see when throughput (and CPU load) is peaking, that we usually run on 5 TaskManagers (with some peaks up to even 8). On low throughput, we are running the minimal number of just one TaskManager. This chart is showing nicely that Reactive Mode is working as expected in this experiment: The number of TaskManagers is adjusting to the load on the system.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- In the bottom right chart, you can see the **TaskManager count** over time. When the throughput (and CPU load) is peaking, we're running on 5 TaskManagers (with some peaks up to even 8). On low throughput, we're running the minimal number of just one TaskManager. This chart showcases nicely that Reactive Mode is working as expected in this experiment: the number of TaskManagers is adjusting to the load on the system.
```

> ### Lessons Learned

Reviewer 2: I think this section is way longer than it needs to be. I'd try to reduce it to around two paragraphs and be more concise: what was the problem you faced? What was the solution?

Author: It is indeed a pretty long section, but I want to explain to users want's going on, instead of just telling them that there was some problem. I tried to mitigate the problem by making the headline more specific -- this way people understand that they can skip if, if it is too specific for them.

During this waiting period, the throughput is at zero and messages are queuing in Kafka (causing spikes in the consumer lag). Once Flink is running again, Flink will try to catch up on the queued messages, causing a spike in CPU load. The autoscaler notices this load spike and allocates more TaskManagers.

We are only seeing this effect on scale down, because scale down is much more disruptive than scaling up. Scale up, which means adding TaskManagers, is disrupting the processing only for the duration of a job restart (which is fast since our application state are just a few bytes for the Kafka offsets), while scaling down is disrupting the processing for roughly 50 seconds.

To mitigate this issue, we have reduced the heartbeat timeout in our experiment to 8 seconds. Additionally, we are looking into improving the behavior of the JobManager to detect TaskManager losses better and faster.

## Conclusion

> In this blog post, we've introduced Reactive Mode, a big step forward in Flink's ability to dynamically adjust to changing workloads, reducing resource utilization and overall costs. The blog post is demonstrating Reactive Mode on Kubernetes, including some lessons learned.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this blog post, we've introduced Reactive Mode, a big step forward in Flink's ability to dynamically adjust to changing workloads, reducing resource utilization and overall costs. The blog post demonstrated Reactive Mode on Kubernetes, including some lessons learned.
```

> Reactive Mode is a new, MVP (minimal viable product) feature of Flink. Before experimenting with it, or using it in production, please check the [documentation](https://ci.apache.org/projects/flink/flink-docs-master/docs/deployment/elastic_scaling), in particular the [limitations](https://ci.apache.org/projects/flink/flink-docs-master/docs/deployment/elastic_scaling/#limitations) section. The biggest limitation is probably that only standalone application mode deployments are supported (no active resource managers or session clusters).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Reactive Mode is new feature in Flink 1.13 and is currently in the [MVP (Minimal Viable Product) phase](https://flink.apache.org/roadmap.html#feature-stages) of product development. Before experimenting with it, or using it in production, please check the [documentation](https://ci.apache.org/projects/flink/flink-docs-master/docs/deployment/elastic_scaling), in particular the current [limitations](https://ci.apache.org/projects/flink/flink-docs-master/docs/deployment/elastic_scaling/#limitations) section. In this phase, the biggest limitation is that only standalone application mode deployments are supported (i.e. no active resource managers or session clusters).
```

> The developers of Reactive Mode are actively looking for feedback on this feature, to continue improving Flink's resource elasticity. If you have feedback, please reach out to the [dev@ mailing list](https://flink.apache.org/community.html#mailing-lists) or to me personally on [Twitter](https://twitter.com/rmetzger_).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The community is actively looking for feedback on this feature, to continue improving Flink's resource elasticity. If you have any feedback, please reach out to the [dev@ mailing list](https://flink.apache.org/community.html#mailing-lists) or to me personally on [Twitter](https://twitter.com/rmetzger_).
```
